Unity: Discover a clearly stated point, or topic sentence, and make
sure that all other information in the paragraph or essay supports
that point.

Support: Support the points with specific evidence, and plenty of it.

Coherence: Organize and connect supporting evidence so that paragraphs
and essays transit smoothly from one bit of supporting information to
the next.  Sentence skills: Revise and edit so that sentences are
error-free for clearer and move effective communication.

The four bases are essential to effective writing, whether it be a
narrative paragraph, cover letter for a job application, or an essay
assignment.

The experience I had writing my first college essay helped shape this
book. I received a C - for the essay. Scrawled beside the grade was
the comment "Not badly written, but ill-conceived." I remember going
to the instructor after class, asking about his comment as well as the
word Log that he had added in the margin at various spots. "What are
all these logs you put in my paper?" I asked, trying to make a joke of
it. He looked at me a little wonderingly. "Logic, Mr. Langan," he
answered, "logic." He went on to explain that I had not thought out my
paper clearly. There were actually two ideas rather than one in my
thesis, one supporting paragraph had nothing to do with either idea,
another paragraph lacked a topic sentence, and so on. I've never
forgotten his last words: "If you don't think clearly," he said, "you
won't write clearly."

I was speechless, and I felt confused and angry. I didn't like being
told that I didn't know how to think. I went back to my room and read
over my paper sveral times. Eventually, I decided that my instructor
was right. "No more logs," I said to myself. "I'm going to get these
logs out of my papers."

My instructor's advice was invaluable. I learned that clear,
disciplined thinking is the key to effective writing. College Writing
Skills with Readings develops this idea by breaking down the writing
process into a series of four logical, easily followed steps. These
steps, combined with practical advice about prewriting and revision,
will help you write strong papers.

1. Discover a clearly stated point, or thesis.
2. Provide logical, detailed support for your thesis.
3. Organize and connect your supporting material.
4. Revise and edit so that your sentences are effective and error-free.

