American Democracy in Action

A democracy is a political system wherein the ultimate power lies with
the voting citizenry. It is exercised by the people during
periodically-held free elections, through which the electorate chooses
representatives to run the government at every level.

Here is the Unitied States, nearly 220 million people [218,959,000]
are eligible to vote in this year's election, though fewer than 147
million [146,311,000] have registered to do so, and fewer still choose
to vote. It has been a contentious election, more so than usual, with
a country divided along ideological lines behind candidates that
represent vastly different proposals for governing over the next four
years.

Yet despite the acrimony, regardless of which candidate wins, and no
matter how close the final vote count, the loser is expected to
concede the election, step aside, and the outgoing administration will
peacefully hand over power to its successor. That is how democracy
works.

The United States has a federal system by which the voters do not
directly elect a President, but instead are represented by electors,
chosen by the state and the political party of the popular winner in
each staet. Individual states have a specific number of electors
determined by the size of their populations. Collectively called the
electoral college, these are the people who officially elect the
president and vice president of the United States.

This is why sometimes, a candidate may win the popular vote, yet lose
the election. Such was the case in the year 2000. In Florida, which
has 25 electoral votes, the margin of victory was impossibly narrow,
and a recount of votes was ordered. Because machines counting the
votes could not read some of the ballots and therefore invalidated
them, another, manual recount was begun.

Finally, the matter was referred to the Supreme Court which ordered
the re-count stopped. George W. Bush emerged the winner with a margin
of 537 votes. In line with country's democratic principles, his
opponent, Al Gore, peacefully conceded the election.

Like democracy itself, the eletion system has its flaws. Nonetheless,
in the United States, it is still the ordinary voters who chooose
their representatives for the country's top elected positions.

The United States remains, as President Abraham Lincoln called it, "a
government of the people, by the people and for the people." Through a
free, fair and impartial election it remains so today.
